Health Main articles: Health in Ethiopia and Healthcare in Ethiopia Declining child mortality in Sub-Saharan Africa and Ethiopia since 1950 Only a minority of Ethiopians are born in hospitals, while most are born in rural households. Those who are expected to give birth at home have elderly women serve as midwives who assist with the delivery.  The "WHO estimates that a majority of maternal fatalities and disabilities could be prevented if deliveries were to take place at well-equipped health centres, with adequately trained staff".  Birth rates , infant mortality rates , and death rates are lower in cities than in rural areas due to better access to education, medicines, and hospitals.  Life expectancy is better in cities compared to rural areas, but there have been significant improvements witnessed throughout the country as of 2016, the average Ethiopian living to be 62.2 years old, according to a UNDP report.  Despite sanitation being a problem, use of improved water sources is also on the rise; 81% in cities compared to 11% in rural areas.  Ethiopia's main health problems are said to be communicable (contagious) diseases worsened by poor sanitation and malnutrition . Over 58 million people (nearly half the population) do not have access to clean water as of 2023.  These problems are exacerbated by the shortage of trained doctors and nurses and health facilities.  The World Health Organization 's 2006 World Health Report gives a figure of 1,936 physicians (for 2003), which comes to about 2.6 per 100,000.  The National Mental Health Strategy, published in 2012, introduced the development of policy designed to improve mental health care in Ethiopia. This strategy mandated that mental health be integrated into the primary health care system.  However, the success of the National Mental Health Strategy has been limited. For example, the burden of depression is estimated to have increased 34.2% from 2007 to 2017.  Furthermore, the prevalence of stigmatizing attitudes, inadequate leadership and co-ordination of efforts, as well as a lack of mental health awareness in the general population, all remain as obstacles to successful mental health care. 