Health [ edit ] Main article: Health in the Gambia Religion [ edit ] Main article: Religion in the Gambia Bundung mosque is one of the largest mosques in Serekunda Religions in the Gambia  Religions Percent Islam 96.4% Christianity 3.5% Other 0.1% Approximately 96% of the population identify as Sunni Muslim, mostly Malikite Sufi . Except for a tiny fraction of one percent, the remainder of the population are Christian. Article 25 of the constitution protects the rights of citizens to practise any religion that they choose and intermarriage between Muslims and Christians is common.    Islam [ edit ] Virtually all commercial life in The Gambia comes to a standstill during major Muslim holidays, which include Eid al-Adha and Eid ul-Fitr .  Most Muslims in The Gambia follow the Maliki school of jurisprudence .  There is also a significant presence of the Ahmadiyya movement in the country.   A Shiite Muslim community exists in The Gambia, mainly due to Lebanese and other Arab immigrants to the region.  The vast majority of South-Asian immigrants are also Muslims.  Christianity [ edit ] The Christian community comprises about 4% of the population.  Residing in the western and southern parts of The Gambia, most members of the Christian community identify themselves as Roman Catholic . However, smaller Christian denominations are also present, including Anglicans , Methodists , Baptists , Seventh-day Adventists , Jehovah's Witnesses , and small evangelical congregations.  Traditional religions [ edit ] It is unclear to what extent indigenous beliefs, such as the Serer religion , continue to be practised. Serer religion encompasses cosmology and a belief in a supreme deity called Roog . Some of its religious festivals include the Xooy , Mbosseh , and Randou Rande . Each year, adherents of Serer religion make the annual pilgrimage to Sine in Senegal for the Xooy divination ceremony.  Serer religion also has a rather significant imprint on Senegambian Muslim society in that Senegambian Muslim festivals such as "Tobaski", "Gamo", "Koriteh" and "Weri Kor" have names representing loanwords from the Serer religion – they were ancient Serer festivals.  [ citation needed ] Like the Serers, the Jola people have their own religious customs, including a major religious ceremony, Boukout . Other religions [ edit ] Owing to a small number of immigrants from South Asia, Hindus and followers of the Baháʼí Faith are also present. 