Health Main article: Health in Kenya Outpatient Department of AIC Kapsowar Hospital  in Kapsowar Health care is one of the low-priority sectors in Kenya and was allocated 4.8% of the national budget in 2019/2020 or just 4.59% of GDP compared to high-priority sectors such as education which was allocated more than 25%. This is below the 4.98% average in Sub-Saharan Africa and 9.83% spent globally. According to the National and County Health Budget Analysis FY 2020/21, the breakdown of county health expenditure was 58% on Policy Planning and Administrative Support Services, 28% on Curative and Rehabilitative Health Services, 8% on Preventive and Promotive Health Services and 7% on Other Programmes. Health care is largely funded by private individuals and their families or employers through direct payments to health care providers , to the National Health Insurance Fund or to medical insurance companies. Additional funding comes from local, international and some government social safety net schemes. Public hospitals are fee-for-service establishments that generate large amounts of county and national government revenues making them highly political and corrupt enterprises.  Private health facilities are diverse, highly dynamic, and difficult to classify, unlike public health facilities, which are easily grouped in classes that consist of community-based (level I) services, run by community health workers ; dispensaries (level II facilities) run by nurses ; health centres (level III facilities), run by clinical officers ; sub-county hospitals (level IV facilities), which may be run by a clinical officer or a medical officer ; county hospitals (level V facilities), which may be run by a medical officer or a medical practitioner ; and national referral hospitals (level VI facilities), which are run by fully qualified medical practitioners . Table showing different grades of clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners in Kenya's public service Nurses are by far the largest group of front-line health care providers in all sectors, followed by clinical officers, medical officers, and medical practitioners. These are absorbed and deployed into government service in accordance with the Scheme of Service for Nursing Personnel (2014), the Revised Scheme of Service for Clinical Personnel (2020) and the Revised Scheme of Service for Medical Officers and Dental Officers (2016). Traditional healers ( herbalists , witch doctors , and faith healers ) are readily available, trusted, and widely consulted as practitioners of first or last choice by both rural and urban dwellers. Despite major achievements in the health sector, Kenya still faces many challenges. The estimated life expectancy dropped in 2009 to approximately 55 years — five years below the 1990 level.  The infant mortality rate was high at approximately 44 deaths per 1,000 children in 2012.  The WHO estimated in 2011 that only 42% of births were attended by a skilled health professional.  Diseases of poverty directly correlate with a country's economic performance and wealth distribution : In 2015/16, 35.6% of Kenyans lived below the poverty line.  Preventable diseases like malaria, HIV/AIDS, pneumonia, diarrhoea, and malnutrition are the biggest burden, major child-killers, and responsible for much morbidity; weak policies, corruption, inadequate health workers, weak management, and poor leadership in the public health sector are largely to blame. According to 2009 estimates, HIV/AIDS prevalence is about 6.3% of the adult population.  However, the 2011 UNAIDS Report suggests that the HIV epidemic may be improving in Kenya, as HIV prevalence is declining among young people (ages 15–24) and pregnant women.  Kenya had an estimated 15 million cases of malaria in 2006.  Women Main articles: Women in Kenya , Child marriage in Kenya , and Polygamy in Kenya The total fertility rate in Kenya was estimated to be 4.49 children per woman in 2012.  According to a 2008–09 survey by the Kenyan government, the total fertility rate was 4.6% and the contraception usage rate among married women was 46%.  Maternal mortality is high, partly because of female genital mutilation ,  with about 27% of women having undergone it.  This practice is however on the decline as the country becomes more modernised, and in 2011 it was banned in Kenya.  Women were economically empowered before colonialisation. By colonial land alienation, women lost access and control of land.  They became more economically dependent on men.  A colonial order of gender emerged where males dominated females.  Median age at first marriage increases with increasing education.  Rape, defilement, and battering are not always seen as serious crimes.  Reports of sexual assault are not always taken seriously.  Youth Article 260 of the Kenyan Constitution of 2010 defines youth as those between the ages of 18 and 34.  According to the 2019 Population and Census results, 75 percent of the 47.6 million population is under the age of 35, making Kenya a country of the youth .  Youth unemployment and underemployment in Kenya has become a problem.  According to the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), approximately 1.7 million people lost their jobs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which eliminated some informal jobs and caused the economy to slow.  The Kenyan government has made progress in addressing the high youth unemployment by implementing various affirmative action programs and projects which include: the National Youth Service , The National Youth Enterprise Development Fund,  The Women Enterprise Fund,  Kazi Mtaani, Ajira Digital , Kikao Mtaani,  Uwezo fund,  Future Bora  and Studio mashinani  that empower youth , offer job opportunities and to raise one's standard of living.