Health [ edit ] Main article: Health in Mali Mali faces numerous health challenges related to poverty, malnutrition , and inadequate hygiene and sanitation .  Mali's health and development indicators rank among the worst in the world.  Life expectancy at birth is estimated to be 53.06 years in 2012.  In 2000, 62–65% of the population was estimated to have access to safe drinking water and only 69% to sanitation services of some kind.  In 2001, the general government expenditures on health totaled about US$4 per capita at an average exchange rate.  Efforts have been made to improve nutrition, and reduce associated health problems, by encouraging women to make nutritious versions of local recipes. For example, the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) and the Aga Khan Foundation , trained women's groups to make equinut , a healthy and nutritional version of the traditional recipe di-dèguè (comprising peanut paste, honey and millet or rice flour). The aim was to boost nutrition and livelihoods by producing a product that women could make and sell, and which would be accepted by the local community because of its local heritage.  Village in the Sahel region Medical facilities in Mali are very limited, and medicines are in short supply.  Malaria and other arthropod -borne diseases are prevalent in Mali, as are a number of infectious diseases such as cholera and tuberculosis .  Mali's population also suffers from a high rate of child malnutrition and a low rate of immunization .  An estimated 1.9% of the adult and children population was afflicted with HIV/AIDS that year, [ clarification needed ] among the lowest rates in Sub-Saharan Africa .  [ dead link ] An estimated 85%–91% of Mali's girls and women have had female genital mutilation (2006 and 2001 data).   Gender equality [ edit ] In 2017, Mali ranked 157th out of 160 countries in the gender inequality index as reported by the United Nations Development Programme .  The Malian Constitution states that it protects women's rights, however many laws exist that discriminate against women.  Provisions in the laws limit women's decision-making power after marriage, in which the husband becomes superior to his wife.  Women are blamed for not maintaining the appearance of their husbands and are also blamed for the actions of their children if they misbehave, which encourages the cultural attitude that women are inferior to men.  The lack of participation of women in politics is due to the idea that politics is associated with men and that women should avoid this sector.  Education is also an area in which boys dominate, since it is a better investment for the parents.  As traditional values and practices have contributed to gender inequality in Mali, conflict and lawlessness have also influenced the growing gap in gender through gender-based violence.  The unstable government of Mali has led to organizations like USAID attempting to improve the lives of the people, mainly women and girls' rights in order to re-engage the development of the country.  Gender relations [ edit ] Religion, the patriarchal norms, and gender-based violence are major negative factors shaping the life of women in Mali.  Patriarchal norms cause major gender inequalities and lead to male domination within the household.  Girls learn household activities like chores, cooking, childcare, etc. at a young age and are expected to take the main responsibility of household chores throughout their life. This hampers women's ability to enter the formal workforce and leads to a lack of education of girls.  Gender-based violence in Mali happens both on a national and a family level. At the national level, in 2012 the conflict in the Northern part of the country increased cases of kidnappings and rapes.  The conflict also reduced women's access to resources, economy, and opportunities.  At the household level, Malian women face gender-based violence through domestic violence, forced marriages, and marital rape.  The Demographic Health Survey for Mali in 2013 stated that 76% of women and 54% of men believed physical harm towards women was acceptable if the women burnt food, argued back, went out without notifying her husband, or refused sexual relations with her husband.  Area of opportunity [ edit ] The lack of education has increased gender inequality in Mali because not many women are working outside the household are even participating in the Public Administration sector.  After adjusting the entrance requirements and access to education, girls still have lower enrollment rates and less access to formal education.  Drop-out rates for girls are 15% higher than that of boys because they have a higher responsibility at home and most parents refuse to allow all their children to go to school, so boys tend to become educated.  Similarly, technical and vocational education has a lower numbers of girls participating and are inadequately distributed in the country because the training centers are focused in the urban cities.  Finally, higher education for girls consist of short programs because early marriages prevent most girls from pursuing a longer term education program like those in science.  Although women do not have the same access of education, in recent decades women have been entering and representing in decision-making positions in the Public Administration sector.  Out of 147 members of Parliament, 15 were women in 2010.  Recent decades show that women are slowly joining important decision-making positions which is changing the attitude and status of women in Mali, which has led to the promotion of women's rights in the political sphere.  Efforts [ edit ] Legislation at the international and national levels have been implemented over the decades to help promote women's rights in Mali.  At the international, Mali signed the Beijing Platform for Action which suggest that women should participate in decision-making and the convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women which is the foundation to women's rights promotion.  At the national level, Mali's Constitution has the Decree No. 092-073P-CTSP that claims equality to all Malian citizens and discrimination is prohibited, which has not been followed.  The Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme (PRSP) and the Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy Programme under the Malian Government seek to improve the well-being of the citizens, and changes to governance and gender in the country.  The Ministry for Advancement of Women, Children and the Family was created specifically for women and children so that their basics rights and needs get met under the law.  Although there exists legislation and policy for gender equality the institutionalization of the National Gender Policy of Mali is necessary to support the importance of women's rights.  Strengthening and the support of girls' and women's access to education and training is recommended to improve gender equality in Mali.  The involvement of international organizations like USAID assist Mali financially to enhance their development through the efforts of the improvement of women's rights. 