Health [ edit ] Main articles: Healthcare in Rwanda and Health in Rwanda Butaro Hospital at Burera , Northern Province The quality of healthcare in Rwanda has historically been very low, both before and immediately after the 1994 genocide.  In 1998, more than one in five children died before their fifth birthday,  often from malaria .  President Kagame has made healthcare one of the priorities for the Vision 2020 development programme,  boosting spending on health care to 6.5% of the country's gross domestic product in 2013,  compared with 1.9% in 1996.  The government has devolved the financing and management of healthcare to local communities, through a system of health insurance providers called mutuelles de santé .  The mutuelles were piloted in 1999, and were made available nationwide by the mid-2000s, with the assistance of international development partners.  Premiums under the scheme were initially US$2 per annum; since 2011 the rate has varied on a sliding scale, with the poorest paying nothing, and maximum premiums rising to US$8 per adult.  As of 2014 [update] , more than 90% of the population was covered by the scheme.  The government has also set up training institutes including the Kigali Health Institute (KHI), which was established in 1997  and is now part of the University of Rwanda . In 2005, President Kagame also launched a program known as The Presidents' Malaria Initiative .  This initiative aimed to help get the most necessary materials for prevention of malaria to the most rural areas of Rwanda, such as mosquito nets and medication. Historical development of life expectancy in Rwanda In recent years Rwanda has seen improvement on a number of key health indicators. Between 2005 and 2013, life expectancy increased from 55.2 to 64.0,  under-5 mortality decreased from 106.4 to 52.0 per 1,000 live births,  and incidence of tuberculosis has dropped from 101 to 69 per 100,000 people.  The country's progress in healthcare has been cited by the international media and charities. The Atlantic devoted an article to "Rwanda's Historic Health Recovery".  Partners In Health described the health gains "among the most dramatic the world has seen in the last 50 years".  Despite these improvements, however, the country's health profile remains dominated by communicable diseases,  and the United States Agency for International Development has described "significant health challenges",  including the rate of maternal mortality, which it describes as "unacceptably high",  as well as the ongoing HIV/AIDS epidemic.  According to the American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , travellers to Rwanda are highly recommended to take preventive malaria medication as well as make sure they are up to date with vaccines such as yellow fever.  Rwanda also has a shortage of medical professionals, with only 0.84 physicians, nurses, and midwives per 1,000 residents.  The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) is monitoring the country's health progress towards Millennium Development Goals 4–6, which relate to healthcare. A mid-2015 UNDP report noted that the country was not on target to meet goal 4 on infant mortality, despite it having "fallen dramatically";  the country is "making good progress" towards goal 5, which is to reduce by three quarters the maternal mortality ratio,  while goal 6 is not yet met as HIV prevalence has not started falling.  Religion [ edit ] Main article: Religion in Rwanda Catholic church in Rwamagana The largest faith in Rwanda is Catholicism , but there have been significant changes in the nation's religious demographics since the genocide, with many conversions to evangelical Christianity, and, to a lesser degree, Islam .  According to the 2012 census, Catholic Christians represented 43.7% of the population, Protestants (excluding Seventh-day Adventists ) 37.7%, Seventh-day Adventists 11.8%, and Muslims 2.0%; 0.2% claimed no religious beliefs and 1.3% did not state a religion.  Traditional religion, despite officially being followed by only 0.1% of the population, retains an influence. Many Rwandans view the Christian God as synonymous with the traditional Rwandan God Imana .  Languages [ edit ] Main article: Languages of Rwanda The country's principal and national language is Kinyarwanda , which is virtually spoken by the entire country (98%).  The major European languages during the colonial era were German , though it was never taught or widely used, and then French , which was introduced by Belgium from 1916 and remained an official and widely spoken language after independence in 1962.  Dutch was spoken as well. The return of English-speaking Rwandan refugees in the 1990s  added a new dimension to the country's language policy,  and the repositioning of Rwanda as a member of the East African Community has since increased the importance of English; the medium of education was switched from French to English in 2008.  Kinyarwanda, English, French, and Swahili are all official languages.  Kinyarwanda is the national language while English is the primary medium of instruction in secondary and tertiary education. Swahili , the lingua franca of the East African Community ,  is also spoken by some as a second language, particularly returned refugees from Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and those who live along the border with the DRC.  In 2015, Swahili was introduced as a mandatory subject in secondary schools.  Inhabitants of Rwanda's Nkombo Island speak Mashi , a language closely related to Kinyarwanda.  French was spoken by slightly under 6% of the population according to the 2012 census and the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie .  English was reported to be spoken by 15% of the population in 2009, though the same report found the proportion of French-speakers to be 68%.  Swahili is spoken by fewer than 1%.  Human rights [ edit ] See also: Human rights in Rwanda and LGBT rights in Rwanda Homosexuality is generally considered a taboo topic, and there is no significant public discussion of this issue in any region of the country. Some lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) Rwandans have reported being harassed and blackmailed.    Same-sex sexual activity is not specifically illegal in Rwanda. Some cabinet-level government officials have expressed support for the rights of LGBT people;  however, no special legislative protections are afforded to LGBT people,  who may be arrested by the police under various laws dealing with public order and morality.  Same-sex marriages are not recognized by the state, as the constitution provides that "[o]nly civil monogamous marriage between a man and a woman is recognized".  Since 2006, Human Rights Watch has documented that Rwandan authorities round up and detain street children , street vendors, sex workers, homeless people, and beggars. They have also documented the use of torture in safe houses and other facilities, such as Kami military camp, Kwa Gacinya and Gikondo prison . 