Health Main articles: Health in South Africa and Healthcare in South Africa Tygerberg Hospital in Parow, Cape Town According to the South African Institute of Race Relations , the life expectancy in 2009 was 71 years for a white South African and 48 years for a black South African.  The healthcare spending in the country is about 9% of GDP.  About 84% of the population depends on the public healthcare system,  which is beset with chronic human resource shortages and limited resources.  About 20% of the population use private healthcare.  Only 16% of the population are covered by medical aid schemes ;  the rest pay for private care out-of-pocket or through in-hospital-only plans.  The three dominant hospital groups, Mediclinic , Life Healthcare and Netcare , together control 75% of the private hospital market.  HIV/AIDS Main article: HIV/AIDS in South Africa Life expectancy in select Southern African countries, 1950–2019. HIV/AIDS has caused a fall in life expectancy. According to the 2015 UNAIDS medical report, South Africa has an estimated seven million people who are living with HIV – more than any other country in the world.  In 2018, HIV prevalence—the percentage of people living with HIV—among adults (15–49 years) was 20.4%, and in the same year 71,000 people died from an AIDS-related illness.  A 2008 study revealed that HIV/AIDS infection is distinctly divided along racial lines: 13.6% of blacks are HIV-positive, whereas only 0.3% of whites have the virus.  Most deaths are experienced by economically active individuals, resulting in many AIDS orphans who in many cases depend on the state for care and financial support.  It is estimated that there are 1,200,000 orphans in South Africa.  The link between HIV, a virus spread primarily by sexual contact, and AIDS was long denied by President Thabo Mbeki and his health minister Manto Tshabalala-Msimang , who insisted that the many deaths in the country are caused by malnutrition , and hence poverty, and not HIV.  In 2007, in response to international pressure, the government made efforts to fight AIDS.  After the 2009 general elections , President Jacob Zuma appointed Aaron Motsoaledi as the health minister and committed his government to increasing funding for and widening the scope of HIV treatment,  and by 2015, South Africa had made significant progress, with the widespread availability of antiretroviral drugs resulted in an increase in life expectancy from 52.1 years to 62.5 years.  Urbanization One online database  lists South Africa having more than 12,600 cities and towns. The following are the largest cities and towns in South Africa. v t e Largest cities or towns in South Africa 2016 Community Survey  , World Urbanization Prospects: The 2018 Revision  Rank Name Province Pop. Johannesburg Cape Town 1 Johannesburg Gauteng 9,167,045 Durban Pretoria 2 Cape Town Western Cape 4,004,793 3 Durban KwaZulu-Natal 3,661,911 4 Pretoria Gauteng 2,437,000 5 Gqeberha Eastern Cape 1,263,051 6 Vereeniging Gauteng 957,528 7 Soshanguve Gauteng 841,000 8 East London Eastern Cape 810,528 9 Bloemfontein Free State 759,693 10 Pietermaritzburg KwaZulu-Natal 679,766 Government and politics Main articles: Government of South Africa , Politics of South Africa , and Law of South Africa See also: LGBT rights in South Africa and Human rights in South Africa Union Buildings in Pretoria, seat of the executive Houses of Parliament in Cape Town, seat of the legislature Constitutional Court in Johannesburg South Africa is a parliamentary republic , but unlike most such republics, the president is both head of state and head of government and depends for their tenure on the confidence of Parliament . The executive, legislature, and judiciary are all subject to the supremacy of the Constitution of South Africa , and the superior courts have the power to strike down executive actions and acts of Parliament if they are unconstitutional. The National Assembly , the lower house of Parliament, consists of 400 members and is elected every five years by a system of party-list proportional representation . The National Council of Provinces , the upper house, consists of ninety members, with each of the nine provincial legislatures electing ten members. After each parliamentary election, the National Assembly elects one of its members as president; hence the president serves a term of office the same as that of the Assembly, normally five years. No president may serve more than two terms in office.  The president appoints a deputy president and ministers (each representing a department ) who form the cabinet . The National Assembly may remove the president and the cabinet by a motion of no confidence . In the most recent election , held on 8 May 2019, the ANC won 58% of the vote and 230 seats, while the main opposition, the Democratic Alliance , won 21% of the vote and 84 seats. The Economic Freedom Fighters , founded by Julius Malema , former president of the ANC Youth League who was later expelled from the ANC, won 11% of the vote and 44 seats. The ANC has been the governing political party in South Africa since the end of apartheid.  South Africa has no legally defined capital city. The fourth chapter of the constitution states "The seat of Parliament is Cape Town, but an Act of Parliament enacted in accordance with section 76(1) and (5) may determine that the seat of Parliament is elsewhere."  The country's three branches of government are split over different cities. Cape Town, as the seat of Parliament, is the legislative capital; Pretoria, as the seat of the president and cabinet, is the administrative capital; and Bloemfontein is the seat of the Supreme Court of Appeal , and has traditionally been regarded as the judicial capital;  although the highest court, the Constitutional Court of South Africa has been based in Johannesburg since 1994. Most foreign embassies are located in Pretoria. Since 2004, South Africa has had many thousands of popular protests,  some violent, making it, according to one academic, the "most protest-rich country in the world".  There have been numerous incidents of political repression as well as threats of future repression in violation of the constitution, leading some analysts and civil society organisations to conclude that there is or could be a new climate of political repression.   In 2022, South Africa placed sixth out of 48 sub-Saharan African countries on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance . South Africa scored well in the categories of Rule of Law , Transparency , Corruption, Participation and Human Rights, but scored low in Safety and Security.  In 2006, South Africa became the first and still the only African country to legalise same-sex marriage .   The Constitution of South Africa is the supreme rule of law in the country. The primary sources of South African law are Roman-Dutch mercantile law and personal law and English Common law , as imports of Dutch settlements and British colonialism.  The first European-based law in South Africa was brought by the Dutch East India Company and is called Roman-Dutch law. It was imported before the codification of European law into the Napoleonic Code and is comparable in many ways to Scots law . This was followed in the 19th century by English law, both common and statutory . After unification in 1910, South Africa had its own parliament which passed laws specific for South Africa, building on those previously passed for the individual member colonies. The judicial system consists of the magistrates' courts , which hear lesser criminal cases and smaller civil cases; the High Court , which has divisions that serve as the courts of general jurisdiction for specific areas; the Supreme Court of Appeal; and the Constitutional Court, which is the highest court. Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of South Africa Ramaphosa and other BRICS leaders during the 15th BRICS Summit in Johannesburg, August 2023. As the Union of South Africa, the country was a founding member of the United Nations (UN), with Prime Minister Jan Smuts writing the preamble to the UN Charter .   South Africa is one of the founding members of the African Union (AU) and has the third largest economy of all the members . It is a founding member of the AU's New Partnership for Africa's Development . After apartheid ended, South Africa was readmitted to the Commonwealth of Nations . The country is a member of the Group of 77 and chaired the organisation in 2006. South Africa is also a member of the Southern African Development Community , South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone , Southern African Customs Union , Antarctic Treaty System , World Trade Organization , International Monetary Fund, G20 , G8+5 , and the Port Management Association of Eastern and Southern Africa . South Africa has played a key role as a mediator in African conflicts over the last decade, such as in Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Comoros, Mozambique and Zimbabwe. President Jacob Zuma and Chinese President Hu Jintao upgraded bilateral ties between the two countries in 2010 when they signed the Beijing Agreement which elevated South Africa's earlier "strategic partnership" with China to the higher level of "comprehensive strategic partnership" in both economic and political affairs, including the strengthening of exchanges between their respective ruling parties and legislatures.   In 2011, South Africa joined the Brazil-Russia-India-China ( BRICS ) grouping of countries, identified by Zuma as the country's largest trading partners and also the largest trading partners with Africa as a whole. Zuma asserted that BRICS member countries would also work with each other through the UN, G20, and the India, Brazil South Africa ( IBSA ) forum.  Military Main article: South African National Defence Force South African Air Force Saab Gripen South African-made Rooivalk attack helicopter SAS Spioenkop (F147) , one of the four Valour-class stealth guided-missile frigates of the South African Navy The South African National Defence Force (SANDF) was created in 1994   as a volunteer military composed of the former South African Defence Force , the forces of the African nationalist groups ( uMkhonto we Sizwe and Azanian People's Liberation Army ), and the former Bantustan defence forces.  The SANDF is subdivided into four branches, the South African Army , the South African Air Force , the South African Navy , and the South African Military Health Service .  The SANDF consists of around 75,000 professional soldiers as of 2019.  In recent years, the SANDF has become a major peacekeeping force in Africa,  and has been involved in operations in Lesotho, the DRC,  and Burundi,  amongst others. It has also served in multinational UN Peacekeeping forces such as the UN Force Intervention Brigade . In 2022 the nation spent US$3.069 billion on its armed forces which is about 0.86% of the nation's entire GDP. Over the years, defence expenditure has been cut as the nation currently faces no external military threats.  The SANDF are often deployed in crime fighting and whenever the South African Police Service (SAPS) are no longer able to control the situation.  During the 2021 South African unrest , South Africa's worst violence since the end of apartheid , saw the deployment of 25,000 troops, more than a dozen military helicopters and heavily armed vehicles deployed in the nation's KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng provinces to assist the South African Police in ending the riots and looting, this was one of the nation's largest military deployments since 1994, the largest deployment of troops since the end of apartheid was in March 2020, when 70,000 troops were deployed to enforce the nation's strict lockdown laws to combat the spread of COVID-19 .  South Africa has a lot of military bases distributed all over the nation, this includes two naval bases, nine air force bases and the army maintains large bases in all nine provinces of the country.  The South African Defence Industry is the most advanced on the African continent and one of the most advanced in the world.   As of 2020 South Africa is the world's 24th largest arms exporter, the only nation in Africa.  The nation designs many types of weapons that range from armored fighting vehicles to ballistic missiles , notable South African-made weapons include the Ratel IFV , the world's first wheeled infantry fighting vehicle , South Africa also made its own attack helicopter known as the " Rooivalk " which is known to be one of the most advanced attack helicopters in the world.  In recent years a R16 billion ($1 billion) contract was signed with the local defence industry which aims to produce 244 units of Badger IFV for the SANDF.  South Africa is the only African country to have successfully developed nuclear weapons . It became the first country (followed by Ukraine) with nuclear capability to voluntarily renounce and dismantle its programme and in the process signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1991.  South Africa undertook a nuclear weapons programme in the 1970s.  South Africa is alleged to have conducted a nuclear test over the Atlantic in 1979,  although this is officially denied; de Klerk maintained that South Africa had "never conducted a clandestine nuclear test."  Six nuclear devices were completed between 1980 and 1990 but all were dismantled by 1991.  In 2017, South Africa signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .  Law enforcement and crime Main articles: Law enforcement in South Africa and Crime in South Africa Officers of the South African Police Service with Vektor R5 rifles on parade in Johannesburg, 2010 Law enforcement in South Africa is primarily the responsibility of the South African Police Service (SAPS), South Africa's national police force. SAPS is responsible for investigating crime and security throughout the country. The South African Police Service has over 1,154 police stations across the country and over 150,950 officers.  In 2023 the Special Task Force (SAPS) placed 9th at the international SWAT competition out of 55 law enforcement teams from across the world making it the best in Africa.  South Africa has the world's largest private security industry ,  with over 10,380 private security companies and 2.5 million private security personnel of which over 556,000 are active,  making it bigger than the South African Police Force and Military combined.  Private security mainly provide assistance to the South African Police Service (SAPS) to combat crime throughout the country. Over the years there has been tremendous growth in the private security industry.  As of February 2023, South Africa has the sixth highest crime rate in the world.  From April 2017 to March 2018, on average 57 murders were committed each day in South Africa.  In the year ended March 2017, there were 20,336 murders and the murder rate was 35.9 per 100,000 – over five times higher than the global average of 6.2 per 100,000.  More than 526,000 South Africans were murdered from 1994 to 2019.  Smash and Grab Hot Spot sign in Retreat, Cape Town South Africa has a high rape rate, with 43,195 rapes reported in 2014/15, and an unknown number of sexual assaults going unreported.  A 2009 survey of 1,738 men in KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape by the Medical Research Council found one in four men admitted to raping someone,  and another survey of 4,000 women in Johannesburg by CIET Africa found one in three said they had been raped in the past year.  Rape occurs most commonly within relationships, but many men and women say that rape cannot occur in relationships; however, one in four women reported having been abused by an intimate partner.  Rapes are also perpetrated by children (some as young as ten).  The incidence of child and infant rape is among the highest in the world, largely as a result of the virgin cleansing myth , and a number of high-profile cases (sometimes as young as eight months)  have outraged the nation.  Between 1994 and 2018, there were more than 500 xenophobic attacks against foreigners in South Africa.  The 2019 Johannesburg riots were similar in nature and origin to the 2008 xenophobic riots that also occurred in Johannesburg.  Administrative divisions Main articles: Administrative divisions of South Africa and Provinces of South Africa Provinces of South Africa Each of the nine provinces is governed by a unicameral legislature , which is elected every five years by party-list proportional representation . The legislature elects a premier as head of government, and the premier appoints an Executive Council as a provincial cabinet. The powers of provincial governments are limited to topics listed in the constitution; these topics include such fields as health, education, public housing and transport. The provinces are in turn divided into 52 districts : 8 metropolitan and 44 district municipalities . The district municipalities are further subdivided into 205 local municipalities . The metropolitan municipalities, which govern the largest urban agglomerations, perform the functions of both district and local municipalities. Province Provincial capital Largest city Area (km 2 )  Population (2016)  Population (2020)  Eastern Cape Bhisho Gqeberha 168,966 6,996,976 6,734,000 Free State Bloemfontein Bloemfontein 129,825 2,834,714 2,929,000 Gauteng Johannesburg Johannesburg 18,178 13,399,724 15,488,000 KwaZulu-Natal Pietermaritzburg Durban 94,361 11,065,240 11,532,000 Limpopo Polokwane Polokwane 125,754 5,799,090 5,853,000 Mpumalanga Mbombela Mbombela 76,495 4,335,964 4,680,000 North West Mahikeng Klerksdorp 104,882 3,748,435 4,109,000 Northern Cape Kimberley Kimberley 372,889 1,193,780 1,293,000 Western Cape Cape Town Cape Town 129,462 6,279,730 7,006,000 Economy Main article: Economy of South Africa The Johannesburg Stock Exchange (JSE) is the largest stock exchange on the African continent and the 17th largest in the world with a market capitalization of $1.36 trillion.  South Africa has a mixed economy . South Africa is the economic nucleus of Africa the country's economy is the most industrialized and technologically advanced in Africa respectively,  and has the largest economy in Africa. It also has a relatively high gross domestic product (GDP) per capita compared to other countries in sub-Saharan Africa US$16,080 at purchasing power parity as of 2023 ranked 95th. Despite this, South Africa is still burdened by a relatively high rate of poverty and unemployment and is ranked in the top ten countries in the world for income inequality ,    measured by the Gini coefficient . South Africa is ranked 40th by total wealth , making it the second wealthiest country in Africa, in terms of private wealth South Africa has a private wealth of $651 billion making South Africa's population the richest in Africa followed by Egypt with $307 billion and Nigeria with $228 billion.  Approximately 55.5% (30.3 million people) of the population is living in poverty at the national upper poverty line while a total of 13.8 million people (25% of the population) are experiencing food poverty.  In 2015, 71% of net wealth are held by 10% of the population, whereas 60% of the population held only 7% of the net wealth, and the Gini coefficient was 0.63, whereas in 1996 it was 0.61.  Unlike most of the world's poor countries, South Africa does not have a thriving informal economy . Only 15% of South African jobs are in the informal sector , compared with around half in Brazil and India and nearly three-quarters in Indonesia . The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD ) attributes this difference to South Africa's widespread welfare system.  World Bank research shows that South Africa has one of the widest gaps between per capita GDP versus its Human Development Index ranking, with only Botswana showing a larger gap.  Johannesburg , the financial capital of South Africa and the African continent  After 1994, government policy brought down inflation, stabilised public finances, and some foreign capital was attracted; however, growth was still subpar.  From 2004 onward, economic growth picked up significantly; both employment and capital formation increased.  During the presidency of Jacob Zuma , the government increased the role of state-owned enterprises (SOEs). Some of the biggest SOEs are Eskom , the electric power monopoly, South African Airways (SAA), and Transnet , the railroad and ports monopoly. Some of these SOEs have not been profitable, such as SAA, which has required bailouts totaling R30 billion ($2.03 billion) over the 20 years preceding 2015.  Principal international trading partners of South Africa—besides other African countries—include Germany, the United States, China, Japan, the United Kingdom and Spain.  The 2020 Financial Secrecy Index ranked South Africa as the 58th safest tax haven in the world.  The South African agricultural industry contributes around 10% of formal employment, relatively low compared to other parts of Africa, as well as providing work for casual labourers and contributing around 2.6% of GDP for the nation.  Due to the aridity of the land, only 13.5% can be used for crop production, and only 3% is considered high potential land.  In August 2013, South Africa was ranked as the top African Country of the Future by fDi Intelligence based on the country's economic potential , labour environment, cost-effectiveness, infrastructure, business friendliness, and foreign direct investment strategy.  Mining Main article: Mining in South Africa An aerial view of the Two Rivers mine in Steelpoort , Limpopo , owned by both African Rainbow Minerals and Impala Platinum Holdings Limited South Africa has always been a mining powerhouse. Until 2006 South Africa was the world's largest gold producer for almost a century, by the end of 2009 gold mining in South Africa had declined rapidly having produced 205 metric tons (mt) of gold in 2008 compared to 1,000 metric tons produced in 1970 (almost 80% of the world's mine supply at the time).  Despite this, the country still has 6,000 tonnes of gold reserves  and is still number 5 in gold production and remains a cornucopia of mineral riches.  South Africa is home to worlds deepest gold mine, Mponeng Gold Mine , reaching nearly 4000m depth.  It is the world's largest producer  of chrome , manganese , platinum , vanadium and vermiculite . It is the second largest producer  of ilmenite , palladium , rutile and zirconium . It is the world's third largest coal exporter.  It is a huge producer of iron ore; in 2012, it overtook India to become the world's third-biggest iron ore supplier to China, the world's largest consumers of iron ore.  Tourism This section is an excerpt from Tourism in South Africa . [ edit ] Tourists taking in the view of Cape Town and Table Mountain from Robben Island South Africa is a tourist destination with the tourist industry accounting for 2.34% of GDP  in 2019 followed by a sharp drop in 2020 to 0.81% of GDP  due to lack of travel caused by the COVID-19 pandemic . The official marketing agency for the country South African Tourism is responsible for marketing South Africa to the world. According to the World Travel & Tourism Council, the tourism industry directly contributed ZAR 102 billion to South African GDP in 2012, and supports 10.3% of jobs in the country.  The official national marketing agency of the South African government, with the goal of promoting tourism in South Africa both locally and globally is known as South African Tourism .  South Africa offers both domestic and international tourists a wide variety of options, among others the picturesque natural landscape and game reserves , diverse cultural heritage and highly regarded wines . Some of the most popular destinations include several national parks, such as the expansive Kruger National Park in the north of the country, the coastlines and beaches of the KwaZulu-Natal and Western Cape provinces, and the major cities like Cape Town , Johannesburg and Durban . According to Statistics South Africa's latest Tourism and Migration Survey, almost 3,5 million travellers passed through the country's ports of entry in August 2017.  The top five overseas countries with the largest number of tourists visiting South Africa were the US , UK , Germany , the Netherlands and France . Most of the tourists arriving in South Africa from elsewhere in Africa came from SADC countries. Zimbabwe tops the list at 31%, followed by Lesotho , Mozambique , Eswatini and Botswana . In addition, Nigeria was the country of origin for nearly 30% of tourists arriving in South Africa.  Infrastructure Roads The Nelson Mandela Bridge in Johannesburg South Africa has a total road network of 750,000 kilometres, the largest of any African country and the 12th largest in the world . According to SANRAL , the road network is valued at more than R2.1 trillion. SANRAL manages national roads and has a network of 22 197 kilometres of paved roads. Provinces are responsible for 222 951 kilometres while, according to the DoT, the municipal network is estimated at 275 661 kilometres of the proclaimed network. The rest are unproclaimed gravel roads (mainly serving rural communities) and are therefore not owned or maintained by any road authority. The country has more than 12 million motor vehicles with an average density of 16 motor vehicles per kilometre. The provincial road network is about 222 951 kilometres in length, consisting of 170 837 kilometres of unpaved and 52 114 kilometres of paved roads.  Railways Main article: Rail transport in South Africa Gautrain higher-speed commuter rail Rail transport in South Africa is an important element of the country's transport infrastructure . All major cities are connected by rail. Transnet Freight Rail mainly operates freight services while PRASA operates commuter services. State-owned utility Transnet Freight Rail is the largest freight rail transport operator on the African continent, the company maintains a rail network of approximately 31,000 kilometres but only 20,900 kilometres of this are in use.  South Africa's railway system is the most developed and largest in Africa as well as the 13th largest in the world ; however, vandalism, theft, and underinvestment has left left the overall condition of the majority of networks in a poor state.  Freight, passenger and port capacity shortages remain a severe constraint in domestic and regional trade.  Coal and iron ore are mainly transported on these lines, the country's rail network carried nearly 230 million tons of freight in 2017 however, this has declined to 179 million tons in 2021.  and it is likely that efforts will be made to revitalize the these transport sectors through private sector partnerships.  Airports Main article: List of airports in South Africa South African Airways Airbus A340 at Munich Airport South Africa has international airports in six cities: Johannesburg , Cape Town , Durban , Port Elizabeth , Kimberley and Nelspruit .  As of 2021, South Africa had 407 airports, making it the leading country in Africa in terms of airport ownership and the country ranked 20th globally.  The four major airports in South Africa are: O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg, Cape Town International Airport , King Shaka International Airport in Durban and Chief Dawid Stuurman International Airport in Port Elizabeth. O.R. Tambo International Airport in Johannesburg is Africa's largest and busiest airport which receives over 21 million passengers a year.  During the 2022 Skytrax World Airport Awards, Cape Town International Airport was voted the best airport on the African continent for the seventh consecutive year, Durban's King Shaka International Airport was voted the second best in Africa and Johannesburg's O.R. Tambo International Airport came third place.  Energy Main article: Energy in South Africa See also: Eskom and List of power stations in South Africa The Koeberg Power Station , the only nuclear power plant on the entire African continent South Africa has a very large energy sector and is currently the only country on the African continent that possesses a nuclear power plant .  The country is the largest producer of electricity on the African continent and it ranks 21st globally.  South Africa is the 7th largest coal producer in the world and produces in excess of 248 million tonnes of coal and consumes almost three-quarters of that domestically. Around 77% of South Africa's energy needs are directly derived from coal and 92% of coal consumed on the African continent is mined in South Africa. South Africa is also the world's 14th largest emitter of greenhouse gases .  The country's primary electricity generator is Eskom, the utility is the largest producer of electricity in Africa , and is among the top seven utilities in the world in terms of generation capacity and among the top nine in terms of sales.  It is the largest of South Africa's state owned enterprises . Eskom generates approximately 95% of electricity in South Africa and operates a number of notable power stations , including the Koeberg Nuclear Power Station in Cape Town, the only nuclear power plant in Africa, Kendal Power Station , the largest dry-cooled power station in the world,  as well as Duvha Power Station which became the first power station in the world to be retrofitted with pulse jet fabric filter plants.  In 2001 Eskom was named the best electricity utility in the entire world.  Energy crisis Main article: South African energy crisis The Kusile Power Station was built as a response to the energy crisis. When fully operational it will be the 4th largest coal-fired power station in the world.  Due to severe mismanagement and corruption at Eskom, the company is R392bn ($22bn) in debt and is unable to meet the demands of the South African power grid.  Due to this, Eskom implemented loadshedding , which is periodically switching off electricity to specific power grids in specific time frames. In South Africa, load shedding is done to prevent a failure of the entire system when the demand for electricity strains the capacity of Eskom's power generating system. Load shedding is characterized by periods of widespread national-level rolling blackouts.  Eskom's latest energy availability factor (EAF) data reveals that mismanagement, corruption, poor maintenance, and sabotage caused power station breakdowns.  In 2023 the South African Military was deployed to protect Eskom's power stations from sabotage and theft.  In 2007 Eskom started the construction of the " Kusile " and " Medupi " power stations, the two mega power stations will be the largest dry-cooled power stations in the world and among the largest power stations in the world scheduled for completion in 2014.  However, these power stations have never met their deadline date with only half of their six units completed and operational mainly caused by long delays and massive cost overruns exceeding more than R300 billion ($16bn) for the two power stations combined, and are only expected to be completed by 2024 or 2026.  Science and technology Main article: Science and technology in South Africa Mark Shuttleworth in space Several important scientific and technological developments have originated in South Africa. South Africa was ranked 59th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023, up from 63rd in 2019.    The first human-to-human heart transplant was performed by cardiac surgeon Christiaan Barnard at Groote Schuur Hospital in December 1967; Max Theiler developed a vaccine against yellow fever , Allan MacLeod Cormack pioneered X-ray computed tomography ( CT scan ); and Aaron Klug developed crystallographic electron microscopy techniques. Cormack and Klug received Nobel Prizes for their work. Sydney Brenner won in 2002, for his pioneering work in molecular biology . Mark Shuttleworth founded an early Internet security company Thawte .  South Africa has cultivated a burgeoning astronomy community. It hosts the Southern African Large Telescope , the largest optical telescope in the Southern Hemisphere . South Africa is currently building the Karoo Array Telescope as a pathfinder for the €1.5 billion Square Kilometre Array project.  Transport Main article: Transport in South Africa MyCiTi Bus in Cape Town Modes of transport include roads, railways, airports, water, and pipelines for petroleum oil. The majority of people in South Africa use informal minibus taxis as their main mode of transport. Bus rapid transit has been implemented in some cities in an attempt to provide more formalised and safer public transport services. South Africa has many major ports including Cape Town, Durban, and Port Elizabeth that allow ships and other boats to pass through, some carrying passengers and some carrying petroleum tankers . Water supply and sanitation Main article: Water supply and sanitation in South Africa Two distinctive features of the South African water sector are the policy of free basic water and the existence of water boards , which are bulk water supply agencies that operate pipelines and sell water from reservoirs to municipalities. These features have led to significant problems concerning the financial sustainability of service providers, leading to a lack of attention to maintenance. Following the end of apartheid, the country had made improvements in the levels of access to water as those with access increased from 66% to 79% from 1990 to 2010.  Sanitation access increased from 71% to 79% during the same period.  However, water supply and sanitation has come under increasing pressure in recent years despite a commitment made by the government to improve service standards and provide investment subsidies to the water industry.  The eastern parts of South Africa suffer from periodic droughts linked to the El Niño weather phenomenon.  In early 2018, Cape Town, which has different weather patterns to the rest of the country,  faced a water crisis as the city's water supply was predicted to run dry before the end of June. Water-saving measures were in effect that required each citizen to use less than 50 litres (13 US gal) per day.  Cape Town rejected an offer from Israel to help it build desalination plants.    