Health Main article: Health in Niger The child mortality rate in Niger (deaths among children between the ages of 1 and 4) is high (248 per 1,000) due to generally poor health conditions and inadequate nutrition for most of the country's children. According to the organization Save the Children , Niger has the world's highest infant mortality rate .  Maradi Reference Hospital Niger also has the highest fertility rate in the world (6.49 births per woman according to 2017 estimates);  this has resulted in nearly half (49.7%) of the Nigerien population being under age 15 in 2020.  Niger has the 11th highest maternal mortality rate in the world at 820 deaths/100,000 live births.  There were 3 physicians and 22 nurses per 100,000 persons in 2006.  Clean drinking water is scarce by global standards, with significant differences between urban and rural areas. Niger is located at the bottom of the UN Human Development Index . Roughly 92% of the population lives in rural areas in the Tillabéri region along the western frontier, and there is a chronic scarcity of clean water, particularly during the hot season, when temperatures regularly exceed 40 degrees Celsius.    Just 40% of the 30,000 inhabitants in Téra , a city northwest of the country's capital of Niamey and near to the Burkina Faso border, have access to a working public water infrastructure.    Société de Patrimoine des Eaux du Niger (SPEN), Niger's water authority, opened ten boreholes and built a water treatment plant in 2018 to provide potable water to Téra and the surrounding areas. The water supply ran out about a year later, and the water treatment facility was forced to close.   With the help of a donation fund from the Dutch government , the European Investment Bank is collaborating with the Niger water authority to find solutions to Niger's water issues. The World Bank identified Niger as one of the 18 fragile regions of Sub-Saharan Africa . The EU bank has a history of investing in regions like these.  The European Investment Bank and the Niger Water Authority are looking at two options for dealing with Téra's water shortages. The first choice is to repair the water tank on the outskirts of town. Another choice is to treat and transport water from the Niger River, which is located more than 100 kilometres to the east. Villages between Téra and the Niger River will also have access to sewage. The European Investment Bank will also look at renewable energy as a way to save costs. 