Health Further information: Health in Nigeria Paediatric ward, General hospital, Ilorin Health care delivery in Nigeria is a concurrent responsibility of the three tiers of government in the country, and the private sector.  Nigeria has been reorganising its health system since the Bamako Initiative of 1987, which formally promoted community-based methods of increasing accessibility of drugs and health care services to the population, in part by implementing user fees.  The new strategy dramatically increased accessibility through community-based health care reform, resulting in more efficient and equitable provision of services. A comprehensive approach strategy was extended to all areas of health care, with subsequent improvement in the health care indicators and improvement in health care efficiency and cost.  Almost half of Nigerians, or 48%, report that they or a household member have fallen ill in the last three months. Malaria had been diagnosed in 88% of the cases and typhoid fever in 32%.  High blood pressure was in third place with 8%. For symptoms of malaria, 41% of Nigerians turn to a hospital , 22% to a chemist's shop, 21% to a pharmacy and 11% seek cure through herbs.  The HIV/AIDS rate in Nigeria is much lower than in other African nations such as Botswana or South Africa whose prevalence (percentage) rates are in the double digits. As of 2019 [update] , the HIV prevalence rate among adults of ages 15–49 was 1.5 per cent.  Life expectancy in Nigeria is 54.7 years on average,  and 71% and 39% of the population have access to improved water sources and improved sanitation , respectively.  As of 2019 [update] , the infant mortality is 74.2 deaths per 1,000 live births .  In 2012, a new bone marrow donor program was launched by the University of Nigeria to help people with leukaemia , lymphoma , or sickle cell disease to find a compatible donor for a life-saving bone marrow transplant , which cures them of their conditions. Nigeria became the second African country to have successfully carried out this surgery.  In the 2014 Ebola outbreak , Nigeria was the first country to effectively contain and eliminate the Ebola threat that was ravaging three other countries in the West African region; the unique method of contact tracing employed by Nigeria became an effective method later used by countries such as the United States when Ebola threats were discovered.    The Nigerian health care system is continuously faced with a shortage of doctors known as " brain drain ", because of emigration by skilled Nigerian doctors to North America and Europe. In 1995, an estimated 21,000 Nigerian doctors were practising in the United States alone, which is about the same as the number of doctors working in the Nigerian public service. Retaining these expensively trained professionals has been identified as one of the goals of the government. 